---

title: "Report from the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impact of Internet Applications and Systems, 2022"
abbrev: "E-Impact Workshop Report"
category: info

docname: draft-arkko-iab-ws-environmental-impacts-report-latest
submissiontype: IAB  # also: "independent", "IAB", or "IRTF"
number:
date:
consensus: false
v: 3
area: IAB
workgroup: IAB
keyword:
 - environment
 - energy
 - Internet impacts
 - sustainability
venue:
  group: IAB
  type: Working Group

author:
 -
    ins: J. Arkko
    fullname: Jari Arkko
    organization: Ericsson
    email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com
 -
    ins: C. S. Perkins
    fullname: Colin Perkins
    organization: University of Glasgow
    email: csp@csperkins.org
 -
    ins: S. Krishnan
    fullname: Suresh Krishnan
    organization: Cisco
    email: suresh.krishnan@gmail.com

normative:

informative:
  RFC4689: 
  RFC7540: 
  RFC7980: 
  RFC8949:
  Adams:
    title: "Extending IPv6 to support Carbon Aware Networking"
    author:
     - ins: C. Adams
     - ins: S. Salsano
     - ins: H. ElBakoury
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Anderson:
    title: "Sustainability Telemetry"
    author:
     - ins: P. Anderson
     - ins: S. Krishnan
     - ins: J. Lindblad
     - ins: S. Mitrovic
     - ins: M. Palmero
     - ins: E. Roure
     - ins: G. Salgueiro
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Arkko:
    title: "Environmental Impacts of the Internet: Scope, Improvements, and Challenges"
    author:
     - ins: J. Arkko
     - ins: N. Lövehagen
     - ins: P. Bergmark
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Bolla:
    title: "6Green: Green Technologies for 5/6G Service- Based Architectures"
    author:
     - ins: R. Bolla
     - ins: R. Bruschi
     - ins: F. Davoli
     - ins: C. Lombardo
     - ins: Beatrice Siccardi
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Clemm:
    title: "Green Networking Metrics"
    author:
     - ins: A. Clemm
     - ins: L. Dong
     - ins: G. Mirsky
     - ins: L. Ciavaglia
     - ins: J. Tantsura
     - ins: M.-P. Odini
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Clemm:
    title: "Challenges and Opportunities in Green Networking"
    author:
     - ins: A. Clemm
     - ins: C. Westphal
     - ins: J. Tantsura
     - ins: L. Ciavaglia
     - ins: M.-P. Odini
     - ins: M. Welzl
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Eckert:
    title: "IETF and Energy – An Overview"
    author:
     - ins: T. Eckert
     - ins: M. Boucadair
     - ins: P. Thubert
     - ins: J. Tantsura
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  GOS:
    title: "Tune In. Turn On. Cut Back. Finding the optimal streaming 'default' mode to increase energy efficiency, shift consumer expectations, and safeguard choice"
    author:
     - ins: Greening of Streaming
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Jacob:
    title: "Towards a power-proportional Internet"
    author:
     - ins: R. Jacob
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Jansen:
    title: "Environment, internet infrastructure, and digital rights"
    author:
     - ins: F. Jansen
     - ins: M. Richman
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  King:
    title: "On Principles for a Sustainability Stack"
    author:
     - ins: M. King
     - ins: S. Krishnan
     - ins: C. Pignataro
     - ins: P. Thubert
     - ins: E. Voit
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Kostentinos:
    title: "End-to-end Energy Efficiency at Service-level in Edge Cloud"
    author:
     - ins: S. Tesfatsion
     - ins: X. Cai
     - ins: A. Ahmed
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Krishnan:
    title: "Sustainability considerations for networking equipment"
    author:
     - ins: S. Krishnan
     - ins: C. Pignataro
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  McDaniel:
    title: "Sustainability is a Security Problem"
    author:
     - ins: P. McDaniel
    date: November 2022
    seriesinfo: "ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS)"
  Manner:
    title: "Sustainability Considerations"
    author:
     - ins: J. Manner
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Manojlovic:
    title: "Internet Infrastructure and Climate Justice"
    author:
     - ins: V. Manojlovic
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Mattera:
    title: "Understanding the Full Emissions Impact from Internet Traffic"
    author:
     - ins: M. Mattera
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Mattsson:
    title: "Environmental Impact of Crypto-Assets"
    author:
     - ins: J. P. Mattsson
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Moran:
    title: "CBOR is Greener than JSON"
    author:
     - ins: B. Moran
     - ins: H. Birkholz
     - ins: C. Bormann
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Navarre:
    title: "It is time to reconsider multicast"
    author:
     - ins: L. Navarre
     - ins: F. Michel
     - ins: O. Bonaventure
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  NMRG:
    title: "Network Management Research Group (NMRG)"
    author:
     - ins: "IRTF"
    date: March 1999
    seriesinfo: "IRTF Research Group, see https://irtf.org/nmrg"
  Nordman:
    title: "Applying Internet Architecture to Energy Systems"
    author:
     - ins: B. Nordman
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  OPSAWG:
    title: "Operations and Management Area Working Group (OPSAWG)"
    author:
     - ins: IETF
    date: June 2007
    seriesinfo: "IETF Working Group, see https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/opsawg/about/"
  Retana:
    title: "A Framework and Requirements for Energy Aware Control Planes"
    author:
     - ins: A. Retana
     - ins: R. White
     - ins: M. Paul
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Robinson:
    title: "Sea Change: Prioritizing the Environment in Internet Architecture"
    author:
     - ins: S. Robinson
     - ins: R. Hellstern
     - ins: M. Diaz
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Schien:
    title: "Rethinking Allocation in High-Baseload Systems: A Demand-Proportional Network Electricity Intensity Metric"
    author:
     - ins: D. Schien
     - ins: P. Shabajee
     - ins: C. Preist
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Schooler:
    title: "A Perspective on Carbon-aware Networking"
    author:
     - ins: E. M. Schooler
     - ins: R. Taylor
     - ins: N. Zilberman
     - ins: R. Soulé
     - ins: D. Nafus
     - ins: R. Manohar
     - ins: U. Cummings
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Thubert:
    title: "Digital Twin and Automation"
    author:
     - ins: P. Thubert
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  TVR:
    title: "Time-Variant Routing (TVR)"
    author:
     - ins: IESG
    date: February 2023
    seriesinfo: "IETF Working Group, see https://datatracker.ietf.org/group/tvr/about/"
  Vanderbauwhede:
    title: "Frugal Computing"
    author:
     - ins: W. Vanderbauwhede
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"
  Welzl:
    title: "Reducing Green House Gas Emissions With Congestion Control"
    author:
     - ins: M. Welzl
     - ins: O. Alay
     - ins: P. Teymoori
     - ins: S. Islam
    date: December 2022
    seriesinfo: "Position paper in the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impacts of Internet Applications and Systems"

--- abstract

Internet communications and applications have both environmental costs
and benefits.  The IAB ran an online workshop in December 2022 on
exploring and understanding these impacts.

The role of the workshop was to discuss the impacts, discuss the
evolving needs from industry, and to identify areas for improvements
and future work. A key goal of the workshop was to call further
attention to the topic and to bring together a diverse stakeholder
community to discuss these issues.

This report summarises the workshop inputs and discussions.

--- middle

# Table of Contents {#toc}

    1.  Table of Contents
    2.  Introduction
    3.  Scope
        3.1. Practical Arrangements
    4.  Workshop Topics and Discussion
        4.1. The Big Picture
        4.2. Understanding the Impacts
        4.3. Improvements
        4.4. Next Steps
             4.4.1. Overall Strategy
             4.4.2. Improvements
             4.4.3. Actions
    5.  Feedback
    6.  Security Considerations
    7.  IANA Considerations
    8.  Position Papers
    9.  Program Committee
    10. Workshop Participants
    11. Informal References
    Appendix A. IAB Members at the Time of Approval
    Appendix B. Acknowledgments

# Introduction {#intro}

The IAB ran an online workshop in December 2022 on exploring
and understanding the environmental impacts of the Internet.

The background for the workshop was that Internet communications and
applications have both environmental costs and benefits. In the
positive direction, they can reduce the environmental impact of our
society, for instance, by allowing virtual interaction to replace
physical travel. Of course, the Internet can equally well act as an
enabler for increasing physical goods consumption, for instance,
through easing commerce.

Beyond the effects associated with its use, Internet applications do
not come for free either. The Internet runs on systems that require
energy and raw materials to manufacture and operate. While the
environmental benefits of the Internet may certainly outweigh this use
of resources in many cases, it is incumbent on the Internet industry
to ensure that this use of resources is minimized and optimized. In
many cases, this is already an economic necessity due to operational
costs. And because many consumers, businesses, and civil societies
care deeply about the environmental impact of the services and
technologies they use, there is also a clear demand for providing
Internet services with minimal environmental impact.

The role of the workshop was to discuss the Internet's environmental
impact, discuss the evolving needs from industry, and to identify
areas for improvements and future work. A key goal of the workshop was
to call further attention to the topic and to bring together a diverse
stakeholder community to discuss these issues. This report summarises
the workshop inputs and discussions.

The workshop drew many position paper submissions. Of these, 26 were
accepted and published to stimulate discussion. There were active
discussions both in the meeting and on the workshop mailing list with
altogether 73 participants.

Perhaps the main overriding observation is how much there is interest
and urgency on this topic, among engineers, researchers, and
businesses.

The workshop discussions and conclusions are covered in {{discussions}}.
The position papers, and links to recordings of workshop sessions, can
be found at https://www.iab.org/activities/workshops/e-impact/.
Presentations held during the discussions can be found from the IETF
Datatracker at https://datatracker.ietf.org/group/eimpactws/meetings/.

The discussion at the IETF will continue after the workshop, both
around specific proposals as well as general discussion on a new
mailing list, the e-impact list (e-impact@ietf.org). You can subscribe
to this list at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/e-impact.

Some improvements addressing specific situations are
being discussed at the IETF, such as the Time Variant Routing (TVR)
proposal that can help optimize connectivity with systems that are
periodically on or reachable (such as satellites). We expect more
proposals in the future.

# Scope {#scope}

Environmental impact assessment and improvements are broad topics,
ranging from technical questions to economics, business decisions, and
policies.

The technical, standards, and research communities can help
ensure that we have a sufficient understanding of the environmental
impact of the Internet and its applications. They can also help to
design the right tools to continue to build and improve all aspects of
the Internet, such as addressing new functional needs, easing of
operations, improving performance and/or efficiency, or reducing
environmental impacts in other ways.

The workshop was expected to discuss:

* The direct environmental impacts of the Internet, including but not
  limited to energy usage by Internet systems themselves (the network
  equipment along with the associated power and cooling
  infrastructure), energy usage of the relevant end-user devices,
  resources needed for manufacturing the associated devices, or the
  environmental impacts throughout the life-cycle of Internet
  systems. This included discussion about the breakdown of those
  impacts across different system components and operations, and
  predictions about the potential future trends for these impacts
  based on changed usage patterns and emerging technologies.

* Discussion of the indirect environmental impacts of the Internet,
  i.e., its effects on society through enabling communications,
  virtual services, or global commerce.

* Sharing information about relevant measurement metrics and data, and
  identify the need for additional metric or measurements.

* Discussing about the need for improvements or associated new
  functionality.

* Sharing information about the societal, business, and regulatory
  situation, to help identify areas of opportunity.

* Identifying areas where further technical work would be most impactful.

* Discussing specific improvement proposals.

* Discussion of past work in the IETF, IRTF, and IAB in this area and
  the status of such work.

* Discussion of observed user behaviours as they relate to
  environmental impacts.

We expected that the workshop discussions connect analysis of the issues
(e.g., scale of energy consumption or carbon footprint) to industry
needs (e.g., deployment opportunities) and solutions.

Business and societal policy questions were in scope only insofar as
they inform the workshop participants about the context we are in, but
what those policies should be was not for the workshop to decide or
even extensively discuss. The scope excluded also how the technical
community works and meets, such as the question of in-person or hybrid
meetings (although it should be noted that the workshop itself was
run as an on-line meeting).

## Practical Arrangements {#practical}

The IAB discussed a potential workshop in this area during its May
2022 retreat. A call for position papers went out in August
2022. Position papers were to be submitted by end of October, a
deadline which was later extended by one week.

As noted, the workshop itself was run as an on-line meeting, with four
half-day long sessions complemented by email discussions and the
position papers submitted by the participants.

All in all, 73 people participated in at least one session in the
workshop. Participation was by invitation only, based on the position
paper submissions.

Every submission was read by at least three members of the program
committee, and acceptance decisions were communicated back to the
authors. Review comments were provided for authors for information,
and some of the papers were revised before the workshop.

The program committee decided that due to interest and differing areas
of expertise, all co-authors were to be invited, and most of them did
attend. The program committee also invited a handful of additional
participants, where they were seen as providing valuable
input. Similarly, as is traditional in IAB workshops, the program
committee members and members of the IAB and IESG were offered an
opportunity to participate even in cases where they did not submit a
position paper.

The IETF secretariat and communications staff provided practical
support during the process, sending announcements, maintaining the
workshop web page with position papers, setting up mailing lists,
tracking submissions, helping with blog article submissions, and so
on.

# Workshop Topics and Discussion {#discussions}

The meeting part of the workshop was divided into four sessions:

* The first session was about the big picture and relationships
  between different aspects of sustainability (see {{session1}}).

* The second session focused on what we know and do not know, and how
  we can measure environmental impacts (see {{session2}}).

* The third session was about potential improvements (see {{session3}}).

* The final fourth session was about conclusions and next steps (see
  {{session4}}).

## The Big Picture {#session1}

This session was about the big picture and how the Internet
influences the rest of the society. We also spoke about the goals of
the workshop.

The session began with a discussion about what is overall involved in
this topic.  We also looked at how the IETF has approached
this topic in the past.

The discussions also expressed the urgency of action and the
importance of continuous improvement: an incremental change every year
is needed for larger savings at the end of the decade. We continued to
talk about the need to recognize how climate changes impact different
communities in the world, often unfairly. Finally, we focused on the
need to be aware of carbon footprint rather than pure energy
consumption - carbon intensity of energy sources varies.

The starting observation from this session was that the issue is much
bigger than our technology alone.  The issue influences all parts of
society, and even matters such as (in)equality, externalized costs,
and justice. Another key observation was that improvements come in
many forms; there is no silver bullet. The opportunity to bring
together people with different backgrounds helped us see how we
approach the topic from different angles - none of them wrong, but
also none of the sole angle to focus on either. Only the combined
effects of complementary efforts can provide the required level of changes.

Some of the useful tools for approaching the issue included of course
technical solutions, but also solidarity, aiming for sufficiency, and
awareness. It is important to not stand still waiting for the perfect
solution. Renewable energy and carbon awareness were seen as a part of
the solution, but not, however, sufficient by themselves.

As an example demonstration of the diversity of angles and
improvements relating to environmental issues, the figure below
classifies the areas that workshop position papers fell on:

    
    
              +---- Actors & organizations      
              |                                 +---- Avoidance
              +---- Benefits to other fields    |                   
              |                                 +---- User behaviour
              +---- Society, awareness, &       |                     
              |     justice                     +---- Implementation
              |                                 |                     
    Workshop -+- Improvements ------------------+                 
              |                                 |
              |     Understanding &             |       +---- Dataplane
              +---- Measurements                |       |
                          |                 Protocols --+---- Routing
                          |                             |
                          +---- Energy                  +---- Edge cloud
                          |                             |
                          +---- Carbon                  +---- Mobile
                                                        |
                                                        +---- Metrics
                                                        |
                                                        +---- Other
     
     
          Figure 1: Position paper submission topics
     
     

Some of the goals for the IETF should include:                                         

* Connecting the IETF with others. Given that the issue is broad, it is
  difficult for one standards organisation alone to make a significant
  impact, or even have the full picture. Working in collaboration with
  others is necessary.  And understanding the situation beyond
  technology will be needed.

* Continuous improvement. It is important that the IETF (among others)
  sets itself on a continuous improvement cycle. No single improvement
  will change the overall situation sufficiently, but over a longer
  period of time, even smaller changes every year will result in
  larger improvements.

* Finding the right targets for improvements in the Internet. These
  should perhaps not be solely defined by larger speeds or bigger
  capacity, but rather increased usefulness to society and declining
  emissions from ICT.

* Specifying what research needs to be done, i.e., where additional
  knowledge would allow us to find better improvements. For instance,
  not enough is known about environmental impacts beyond energy, such
  as natural resources used for manufacturing, or the use of
  water. Carbon-awareness and measurements across domains is also
  poorly understood today. And business model impacts -- such as the
  role of advertising on Internet's carbon footprint -- deserve more
  study.

## Understanding the Impacts {#session2}

The second session focused on what we know and do not know, and how we
can measure environmental impacts.

The initial presentation focused on narrowing down
the lower and upper limits of the energy use of the Internet. There
was also discussion regarding the energy consumption of the ICT sector
and how it compares to some other selected industries such as
aviation. Dwelling deeper into the energy consumption and the carbon
footprint of the ICT sector there was discussion regarding how the
impact was split amongst the networks, data centres and user devices
(with the user devices appearing to contribute to the largest fraction
of the impact). Also, while lot of the energy consumption related studies
and discussions were focused on data centers, some studies
suggested that data center energy usage is still a small fraction of
energy use as compared to residential and commercial buildings.

There were also further discussions both during the presentations and in
the hallway chats regarding the press and media coverage of the potential
environment technologies. The overall sense of the participants seemed to
be that there was a lot of sensational headlines, but they were not really
backed by measurements done by the industry and academia, and were fraught
with errors. Some of these media reports were off by quite a bit, sometimes
even by an order of magnitude (e.g., confusing MBps vs Mbps in calculations).

In the rest of the session we looked at both
additional data collected from the operators as well as factors that -
depending on circumstances - may drive energy consumption. These
include for instance peak capacity and energy proportionality.

If energy consumption is little affected by offered load, the ratio of
peak capacity to typical usage becomes a critical factor in energy
consumption. On the other hand, systems with energy proportionality
scale their resource and energy consumption more dynamically based on
offered load. There were also observations that showed that the energy
consumption grew as a step function when the peak capacity was
reached (even instantaneously) and additional capacity was built up by
performing network upgrades to handle these new peaks. This resulted
in a overall higher baseline energy consumption even when the average
demand did not change that much. Thus, the ability to shift load to
reduce peak demand was highlighted as a potential way to delay
increases in consumption when energy proportionality is lacking.


## Improvements {#session3}

The third session was about potential improvements.

As noted earlier, there are many different types of improvements. In
the discussion we focused mostly on protocol aspects, and looked at
metrics, telemetry, routing, multicast, and data encoding formats.

The initial two presentations focused on metrics and telemetry with
the premise that visibility is a very important first step
(paraphrasing Peter Drucker's mantra of "You cannot improve what you
don't measure").  There was a discussion of the scopes of emissions
and it seemed that from a networking vendor perspective, while
directly controlled emissions and emissions from purchased energy are
easily measurable, emissions from across the entire value chain can be
much larger. Thus it seemed important that the networking vendors had to put
in effort into helping their customers measure and mitigate their
environmental impact as well. The need for standardized metrics was
very clear as it helps avoid proprietary, redundant and even
contradictory metrics across vendors.

The initial and the near-term focus was related to metrics and techniques
related to energy consumption of the networking devices themselves while
the longer term focus can go into topics much further removed from the IETF
such as packaging, circular design in order to form a more holistic picture.
The overall feeling was that the topic of metrics, telemetry, and management
are quite specific and could be targets to be worked on in the IETF in the near
term.

The next part of the discussion highlighted the need to understand the
trade-offs involved in changing forwarding decisions - such as
increased jitter and stretch. Jitter is about delay fluctuation
between packets in a stream {{RFC4689}}. Stretch is defined as the
difference between the absolute shortest path traffic could take
through the network and the path the traffic actually takes
{{RFC7980}}. Impacts on jitter and stretch point to the need for
careful design and analysis of improvements from a system perspective,
to ensure that the intended effect is indeed reached across the entire
system, and is not only a local optimum.

We also talked about the potentially significant impact of using
efficient binary formats instead of textual representations when
carrying data in protocols. This is something that can be relatively
easily adopted in new protocols as they are developed. Indeed, some
recently finished protocols such as HTTP/2 have already chosen to use
this technique {{RFC7540}}.  General-purpose binary formats such as
Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) {{RFC8949}} are also
available for use.

There were also some interesting discussions regarding the use of
multicast and whether it would help or hurt on the energy efficiency
of communications. There were some studies and simulations that showed
the potential gains to be had but they were to be balanced against some of
the well known barriers to deployment of multicast. We also heard from
a leading Content Delivery Network (CDN) operator regarding their
views on multicast and how it relates to media usage and consumption
models. The hallway conversations also talked about the potential
negative effects of multicast in wireless and constrained
networks. Overall the conclusion was that the use of multicast can
potentially provide some savings but only in some specific scenarios.

For all improvements, the importance of metrics was frequently
highlighted to ensure changes lead to a meaningful reduction in
overall system carbon footprint.

## Next Steps {#session4}

The final fourth session was about conclusions and next steps. This
section highlights some of these conclusions.

### Overall Strategy {#strategy}

While only a few things are easy, the road ahead for making
improvements seems clear: we need to continue to improve our
understanding of the environmental impact, and have a continuous cycle
of improvements that lead not just to better energy efficiency but to
reduced overall carbon emissions. The IETF can play an important part
in this process, but of course there are other aspects beyond
protocols.

On understanding our environmental impact the first step is better
awareness of sustainability issues in general, which helps us
understand better where our issues are. The second step is willigness
to understand in detail what the causes and relationships are within our
issues. What parts, components, or behaviours in the network cause
what kinds of impacts? An overall drive in the society to report and improve
environmental impacts can be helpful in creating a willingness to get
to this information.

On establishing a continuous cycle of improvements, the ability to
understand where we are, making improvements, and then seeing the
impact of those improvements is of course central. But obviously a key
question is what are the potential improvements, and how can we
accelerate them? It should be noted that quick, large changes are not
likely. But a continuous stream of smaller changes can create a large
impact over a longer period of time.

One of the key realizations from this workshop was that the problem to be solved
is very large, complex and that there is no single solution that fixes everything.
There were some solutions that could help in the near term and others that
would only show benefits over longer periods, but they are both necessary.

One further challenge is that due to the size and complexity of the problem, it 
was very likely that there might be varying opinions on what KPIs need 
to be measured and improved.

### Improvements {#nextstepsimprovements}

In looking at potential improvements, it is essential that any
associated tradeoffs can be understood (note that not all improvements
do indeed entail a tradeoff). The role of the Internet in improving
other areas of society must not be diminished.”  For instance,
discussion in session three revealed how some changes might impact
latency and jitter. Given that these characteristics are an important
factor how virtual meetings are perceived by potential participants,
it is important that the performance of networks satisfies these
participants at a level where there's willingness to use them over
other potentially more environmentally harmful methods, such as
travel.

Note that while virtual meetings are a common example, it is important to
consider different use cases, some of which may not be as obvious to
us human users as meetings are. Improvements may bring different or
even larger impacts in other situations, e.g., Internet connected
electronics might benefit from different characteristics than human
users, e.g., with regards to support for intermittent connectivity.

The relationships between different system components and the impact
of various detailed design choices in networks is not always
apparent. A local change in one node may have an impact in other
nodes. When considering environmental sustainability, in most cases
the overall system impact is what counts more than local impacts. Of
course, other factors, such as device battery life and availability of
power may result in other preferences, such as optimising for low
power usage of end-user devices, even at the cost of increases
elsewhere.

In terms of useful tools for building improvements, the following were
highlighted in discussions:

* Masures beyond protocol design, such as implementations or renewable
  energy use. Not everything is about protocols.

* Metrics, measurements, and data are very beneficial. Carbon-aware
  metrics would in particular be very useful. All additional
  information makes us more aware of what the environmental impacts
  are, but also enables optimization, AI-based adjustments, or
  carbon-directed computing and networking tools, and so on.

* It would be beneficial to be able to provide various systems a more
  dynamic ability to slow down and sleep.  Awareness of energy
  availability and type would also allow us to employ time and place
  shifting for reducing carbon impacts.

* When we design systems, paying attention to the used data formats
  may pay off significantly, as argued in {{Moran}}.

* Possibly there’s a new opportunity for deploying multicast as well {{Navarre}}.

* Designing systems for energy constrained situations may actually
  make the resulting systems work well in several environments.

### Actions {#actions}

The workshop discussed a number of possible actions. These actions are
not about how to take specific technical solutions forward, but rather
about how to discuss the topic going forward or what technical areas
to focus on:

* We need to continue the discussion – not all questions are
   answered. Additional discussion within the IETF will be needed.
   Continuing to connect the IETF with others in society and other SDOs
   around this topic is also useful.

* It is useful to find a role and a scope for IETF work in this
  area. The IETF will not develop alternative energy sources, work on
  social issues or have detailed discussions about implementation
  strategies or electronics design. However, the IETF has a role in
  measurement mechanisms, protocol design and standards -- but of
  course activities in this role need to be aware of other aspects,
  such as implementation strategies.

* Increase our understanding of the environmental impacts of
  Internet technologies. One discussion topic
  during the workshop was also whether each new RFC should
  dedicate a section to discuss the these impacts. No conclusion
  was drawn about the way to document these in RFCs, but it is clear
  that the IETF community will need to understand the environmental
  issues better. (Perhaps in addition to learning about the actual
  issues, guidelines for analysing protocols with regards to their
  impacts could be useful.)

* IETF activities on specific technologies are already ongoing or
   starting, such as metrics discussed, for instance, at the NMRG
   research group {{NMRG}} or the OPSAWG working group {{OPSAWG}}, or
   the new Time Variant Routing (TVR) working group {{TVR}}. It may be
   also useful to start from picking the low-hanging fruits, such as:

   * Focusing on the use of efficient data formats.
   * Avoiding crypto assets - such as Non-Fungible Tokens
   (NFTs) and cryptocurrencies.
   * Being able to carry information that needs to be shared for the purposes of enabling
   load and time shifting.

* Help initiate research activities that address some of the issues,
  such as broader gathering and sharing of measurement data, analysis
  of this data and looking at business related issues such as the impact
  of peering or advertising impacts sustainability.  In addition,
  there may be a need to look at research for specific areas of
  improvements that are promising but not ready for standards
  discussion.

In summary, the goals that the IETF should have include:

* Full understanding of the Internet’s environmental impact.
* Continuous improvement of our technology.
* Launching research relevant activities.

# Feedback {#feedback}

The organizers received generally positive feedback about the workshop.

One practical issue from the organizer's point of view was that due to
the extension of the deadline, the final submissions and paper reviews
collided in part with the IETF-115 meeting. This led to it being very
difficult for the program committee and practical organization staff
to find time for the activity. We recommend avoiding such collisions
in the future.

# Security Considerations

The workshop itself did not address specific security topics. Of
course, individual changes in Internet technology or operations that
influence environmental impacts may also influence security
aspects. These need to be looked at for every proposed change.

Such influence on security may come in different forms. For instance:

* A mechanism that makes, for instance, energy consumption information
  available may be susceptible to tampering or providing false
  information. For instance, {{McDaniel}} argues that economics and
  history shows that different players will attempt to cheat if a
  benefit can be acrued by doing so, e.g., by misreporting.  As a
  result, sustainability measures and systems must be modeled as
  systems under threat.

* A mechanism that allows control of network elements for optimization
  purposes may be misused to cause denial-of-service or other types of
  attacks.

* Avoiding the use of crypto assets where other mechanisms suffice.

* Streamlining what data is sent may improve privacy if less information
  is shared.

# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA actions.

# Position Papers

The following position papers were submitted to the workshop:

* Chris Adams, Stefano Salsano, Hesham ElBakoury: "Extending IPv6 to support Carbon Aware Networking" {{Adams}}
* Per Anderson, Suresh Krishnan, Jan Lindblad, Snezana Mitrovic, Marisol Palmero, Esther Roure, Gonzalo Salgueiro: "Sustainability Telemetry" {{Anderson}}
* Jari Arkko, Nina Lövehagen, Pernilla Bergmark: "Environmental Impacts of the Internet: Scope, Improvements, and Challenges" {{Arkko}}
* R. Bolla, R. Bruschi, F. Davoli, C. Lombardo, Beatrice Siccardi: "6Green: Green Technologies for 5/6G Service- Based Architectures" {{Bolla}}
* Alexander Clemm, Lijun Dong, Greg Mirsky, Laurent Ciavaglia, Jeff Tantsura, Marie-Paule Odini: "Green Networking Metrics" {{Clemm}}
* Alexander Clemm, Cedric Westphal, Jeff Tantsura, Laurent Ciavaglia, Marie-Paule Odini : "Challenges and Opportunities in Green Networking" {{Clemm}}
* Toerless Eckert, Mohamed Boucadair, Pascal Thubert, Jeff Tantsura: "IETF and Energy – An Overview" {{Eckert}}
* Greening of Streaming: "Tune In. Turn On. Cut Back. Finding the optimal streaming 'default' mode to increase energy efficiency, shift consumer expectations, and safeguard choice" {{GOS}}
* Romain Jacob: "Towards a power-proportional Internet" {{Jacob}}
* Fieke Jansen and Maya Richman: "Environment, internet infrastructure, and digital rights" {{Jansen}}
* Michael King, Suresh Krishnan, Carlos Pignataro, Pascal Thubert, Eric Voit: "On Principles for a Sustainability Stack" {{King}}
* Suresh Krishnan, Carlos Pignataro: "Sustainability considerations for networking equipment" {{Krishnan}}
* Jukka Manner: "Sustainability Considerations" {{Manner}}
* Vesna Manojlovic: "Internet Infrastructure and Climate Justice" {{Manojlovic}}
* Mike Mattera: "Understanding the Full Emissions Impact from Internet Traffic" {{Mattera}}
* John Preuß Mattsson: "Environmental Impact of Crypto-Assets" {{Mattsson}}
* Brendan Moran, Henk Birkholz, Carsten Bormann: "CBOR is Greener than JSON" {{Moran}}
* Louis Navarre, Franoçis Michel, Olivier Bonaventure: "It is time to reconsider multicast" {{Navarre}}
* Bruce Nordman: "Applying Internet Architecture to Energy Systems" {{Nordman}}
* Alvaro Retana, Russ White, Manuel Paul: "A Framework and Requirements for Energy Aware Control Planes" {{Retana}}
* Shayna Robinson, Remy Hellstern, Mariana Diaz: "Sea Change: Prioritizing the Environment in Internet Architecture" {{Robinson}}
* Daniel Schien, Paul Shabajee, Chris Preist: "Rethinking Allocation in High-Baseload Systems: A Demand-Proportional Network Electricity Intensity Metric" {{Schien}}
* Eve M. Schooler, Rick Taylor, Noa Zilberman, Robert Soulé, Dawn Nafus, Rajit Manohar, Uri Cummings: "A Perspective on Carbon-aware Networking" {{Schooler}}
* Selome Kostentinos Tesfatsion, Xuejun Cai, Arif Ahmed: "End-to-end Energy Efficiency at Service-level in Edge Cloud" {{Kostentinos}}
* Pascal Thubert: "Digital Twin and Automation" {{Thubert}}
* Wim Vanderbauwhede: "Frugal Computing" {{Vanderbauwhede}}
* Michael Welzl, Ozgu Alay, Peyman Teymoori, Safiqul Islam: "Reducing Green House Gas Emissions With Congestion Control“ {{Welzl}}

# Program Committee

The program committee members were:

* Jari Arkko, Ericsson (program committee co-chair)
* Lars Eggert, Netapp (program committee co-chair)
* Colin Perkins, University of Glasgow (program committee co-chair)
* Luis M. Contreras, Telefónica
* Toerless Eckert, Futurewei
* Martin Flack, Akamai
* Mike Mattera, Akamai
* Barath Raghavan, USC
* Daniel Schien,University of Bristol
* Eve M. Schooler, Intel
* Rick Taylor, Ori Industries

# Workshop Participants

The participants who attended at least one of the four sessions were:

* Alex Clemm
* Ali Rezaki
* Arif Ahmed
* Beatrice Siccardi
* Brendan Moran
* Bruce Nordman
* Carlos Pignataro
* Carsten Bormann
* Cedric Westphal
* Chiara Lombardo
* Chris Adams
* Colin Perkins
* Daniel Schien
* Dawn Nafus
* Dom Robinson
* Eric Voit
* Eric Vyncke
* Esther Roure Vila
* Eve M. Schooler
* Fieke Jansen
* Franco Davoli
* Gonzalo Salgueiro
* Greg Mirsky
* Henk Birkholz
* Hesham ElBakoury
* Hosein Badran
* Iankang Yao
* Jan Lindblad
* Jari Arkko
* Jens Malmodin
* Jiankang Yao
* John Preuß Mattsson
* Jukka Manner
* Julien Maisonneuve
* Kristin Moyer
* Lars Eggert
* Laurent Ciavaglia
* Lijun Dong
* Louis Navarre
* Louise Krug
* Luis M. Contreras
* Marisol Palmero Amador
* Martin Flack
* Maya Richman
* Michael Welzl
* Mike Mattera
* Mohamed Boucadair
* Nina Lövehagen
* Noa Zilberman
* Olivier Bonaventure
* Pascal Thubert
* Paul Shabajee
* Per Andersson
* Pernilla Bergmark
* Peyman Teymoori
* Qin Wu
* Remy Hellstern
* Rick Taylor
* Rob WIlton
* Rob Wilton
* Romain Jacob
* Russ White
* Safiqul Islam
* Selome Kostentinos Tesfatsion
* Shayna Robinson
* Snezana Mitrovic
* Stefano Salsano
* Suresh Krishnan
* Tirumaleswar Reddy
* Toerless Eckert
* Uri Cummings
* Vesna Manojlovic
* Wim Vanderbauwhede

--- back

# IAB Members at the Time of Approval

* Jari Arkko, Ericsson
* Deborah Brungard, AT&T
* Lars Eggert, NetApp
* Wes Hardaker, USC/ISI
* Cullen Jennings, Cisco Systems
* Mallory Knodel, Center for Democracy and Technology
* Mirja Kühlewind, Ericsson
* Zhenbin Li, Huawei
* Tommy Pauly, Apple
* David Schinazi, Google
* Russ White, Akamai
* Qin Wu, Huawei Technologies
* Jiankang Yao, CNNIC China Internet Network Information Center

# Acknowledgments

Naturally, most of the credit goes to the workshop participants. 

The organizers wish to thank Cindy Morgan and Greg Wood for their work on the
practical arrangements and communications relating to he
workshop. This report was greatly enhanced by the feedback provided on
it, thanks to Michael Welzl in particular for his detailed review.
